Now we're going to be talking about
actions, If you've used Redux or
NgRx or ViewX or
any of those similar libraries before,
actions might mean something different.
But in state machine lingo
an action is a side effect,
it's something that's fire and
forgets something that happens, and
you could consider these effects to
be the output of the state machine.
So as you're moving through the state
machine, things might happen, and
we want to keep track of what
things could possibly happen,
when you transition between states.
If you go to the Wikipedia article for
finite state machine over here,
You'll see that in concepts and
terminology,
there's actions which represents
what side effects are done when you
either enter a state or you exit a state,
or you take a transition.
So in short, with state machines,
consider actions to be your side effects,
so there's three types of actions, or
three locations of actions that
could happen in your state machine.
The first one is transition actions, so
these are actions that are executed
whenever you take a transition.
For example, if you go from idle to FETCH,
then this fetchdata
action is going to occur.
Now, when you go from idle to FETCH,
you land on the pending state, and
there we have what's
called an entry action.
These are actions that are taken
whenever a state is entered, so
when you enter the pending states, in this
case we are going to show a spinner and
that's going to be the side effect that's
executed once you get into that state.
Now once you exit that state, and
exiting a state means transitioning out
of the state and into a new state,
then the exit actions are going to occur.
So in this case, when we go from pending
to resolved on the RESOLVE events,
the hide spinner action is going to occur.
So let's talk about action order for
a minute,
let's say that we're on the idle state.
When we go from idle to pending,
the first thing that's going to happen and
you could follow the arrow, which
makes it a little bit more intuitive,
is this fetchdata action
is going to happen.
Once you reach pending, this
showSpinner action is going to happen,
so this action is taken first,
and then this one.
And once the RESOLVE event happens,
then we exit this pending state so
this hideSpinner action is going to occur.
Now as far as action order,
again following the arrows,
the first thing that's going to happen,
is the exit action of the state that
you're currently on,
is going to be taken first.
And then the transition
action is going to occur,
and entry action of the state that
you arrive on, is going to happen.
So the order goes, exit actions,
transition actions then entry actions.
However in general since actions
are side effects that are just fire and
forget, we don't want to
depend on action too much.
If you find yourself depending on certain
actions to occur before another action,
then that's a sign that you might
want some model it as extra states
instead of just implicitly relying
on this action order to occur.
So in Xstates,
we have those three places where you could
add extra actions in a transition,
you could add it to the actions property.
And in action function is going to be
a function that takes in the context which
we'll get into in a minute, and the event
and you could do whatever you want inside
that action because, again,
it's considered a side effect.
Inside each state node, you have an entry
property, which could contain one or
more actions that are executed
once you enter that state.
And so we have entry, and
we also have exit over here.
Now a better way to represent
these actions is to use or
to separate them out from inline
functions, into their own functions.
And in this case,
we're using the ES6 that arrow syntax for
the functions, since we're just
console.logging something,
we don't necessarily need the context or
the events.
So this enter active action is
going to log into the active, and
we could just put that right over here,
and it's a bit cleaner.
And it also shows up really well in the
visualizer which we'll see in a minute.
Now, you could also have multiple
actions as well, so one syntax
that is sort of a syntax trigger for
Xstate, is that you could specify one or
more actions either as a single action,
or an array of actions.
If you give it an array, it's going to
execute both of these actions, again,
don't depend on the order.
Just assume that interactive and
send telemetry,
are going to be executed at exactly
the same time, because they will be.
So, when you enter active both
these events will happen, and
then once you click this clickActive,
click active action is going to occur.
And we also have this exitActive
which is going to occur before,
clickActive, and
it's gonna go into inactive.
It might make more sense if we
actually show this in the visualizer,
so, we're going to go ahead and do that,
I'm going to copy this,
right into the visualizer.
Okay, over here,
that's console.log sending telemetry,
and hopefully, this is correct great.
All right, so now you could see
when you click the states tab,
once we entered the initial state
which is active, we're going to
execute two actions, the enterActive,
and the sendTelemetry action as well.
Once we click think about whats going
to happen, the first thing that will
happen is we're going to exit active,
so we're gonna call the exitAction, and
we're going to execute it, then we're
going to execute the clickActive action.
And then we're going to enter inactive, so
we're going to execute
this enterinactive action.
So once we click,
that's exactly what happens.
We have exitInactive,
clickInactive and enteriInactive.
Now, the way to get to show up
on the visualizer is to convert
those action functions to strings such
as enterActive, clickActive, exitActive.
And you can think about this as if you
were trying to make a JSON version of your
machine.
So, we could specify
the names of the actions
that are going to be executed right
here in the machine definition, and
as a second argument,
we pass an options object.
And this object allows you to specify
different things such as, the actions.
So, we could say, this sentTelemetry
action which we reference up here,
as the string, refers to this side effect,
which is sending telemetry.
Same thing with enterActive, clickActive,
and all of the other actions.